his economic philosophy, his politics, and what have you, much more so than me.
Larry, with these five professors, in a Christmas party of all times, got me in the corner and said, you know, Mel, you've been an embarrassment to our college.
I said, what do you mean?
What have I done?
He said, well, I understand you're rather outspoken.
You thought Goldwater would be the best president we've ever had in this country.
I said, I don't know if I went to that extreme, but I sure did want him, not LBJ.
I don't think Johnson would be my type of president, but Goldwater, I think he was a solid man.
Anyway, I got so teed off, not to use Hollywood expressions, I got so teed off at that thing that I was determined again, now I've already lost the Louisiana State job.
They had offered me that and I said, no, I'm not going to stay here at Florida State.
And my wife, therefore at this point, was somewhat amenable to a move, but not of all things to Texas and Texas A&M.
So anyway, I'm sitting in front of Earl Rudder, and almost before he started talking to me, I'm staring at LBJ saying to myself, uh-oh, this is not my place.
I'm a Goldwater man.
And Earl Rudder, bless him, I love the man.
He looked at me, are you a fan of LBJ?
I don't know whether I called him General Rudder then, or President Rudder, or Mr. Rudder, or Earl even.
I don't recall, but in my mind he's always been Earl.
And I said, well frankly, let me be honest with you, I'm not fond of the man.
I was very fond, and am still fond of cold water.
I thought that was going to be the end of it.
The next thing he starts telling me about A&M, he starts telling me about Larry Falwick, he starts telling me about his dreams for the university.
And boy, I'm getting really, really excited now because apparently I don't have to genuflect the man.
I don't have to be a phony.
I don't have to make believe, oh yes, LBJ, isn't he wonderful?
When Don, well I know, I don't think so, and I didn't like his great society talk and all of that for all of all.
It just wasn't my form of economics.
All of a sudden, I'm being dismissed to go back with Frank Hubert
And my wife is outside because she had been invited to come.
Now, you know, in the military, especially when you get up on that general level, and I never did get near that, but anyway, when you become general, you decide that your best command involves your top soldiers.
And if you're top soldiers, if you're majors and you're like colonels and what have you, if these fellows are happily married to a real good woman,
You've got a good command.
So Earl wanted to interview Mari.
Mari had never been interviewed in her life.
I sort of took her out of a normal lifestyle when I married her, you know.
And the next thing she knew, she's raising children and not worrying about jobs, and it was my problem to make sure we were eating.
And all of a sudden she's being interviewed.
Anyway the next day we're going back home and she said, well thank heaven we're not going to that place.
I said, what do you mean?
I think I'm going to take the job.
Boy, did we have a battle on that one for a while.
And this was going into Houston if I recall.
We had to have maybe, that fellow used to drive people back and forth.
I can't remember his name but I know who you're talking about.
Sam something.
Anyway, we're almost having a violin argument in the backseat, and she's letting me know no one's going to interview me.
I said, honey, you were being honored.
That man was trying to tell you he may have liked me, but he cared really what you were like.
No one else has ever bothered you in any job I've ever taken.
They never knew you.
You didn't matter to, and I mentioned the other presidents of other universities that she later on knew.
I said, this man was honoring you.
He was trying to tell you how important you are to him because otherwise I'm not his man.
Well, by the time we got back to Tallahassee, she mellowed a little bit, but never really.
Did she indicate what topics he talked to her about?
Gosh I could find out, you know she's with me in town.
I think they, sort of what kind of children do you have?
What church do you go to?
And things like that, the normal type of conversation.
I doubt that he, oh I think he asked do you enjoy music and she said yes, I was a flutist and I could have gone to Juilliard if not for Mel and so forth and stuff like that.
What's Mel like?
Oh he moves me too often.
Did Mr. Rudder indicate why, I've often wondered, why economics and chemistry?
Did he indicate why he became so interested in that department, in the economics department, to get it back going?
I think he just wanted to get rid of Al, without mentioning the names of the other fellows in the department.
Irv Ling was a dandy human being.
But there were several in the department who were rather extremely liberal and much too, and there's profanity from one fellow that I don't, you know who I'm referring to, and stuff like that was going on.
Plus, especially the Willie Nelson thing that apparently blew up way beyond its own importance.
And so I think Earl was thinking he'd do anything to change the scene in econ.
He didn't indicate that he had any special source of funding specifically for economics, did he?
Whatever he had, I'll tell you the deal I got in a second.
I think Larry Forwick was also a catalyst here, a big one.
In other words, in retrospect, and of course we're speaking of a man who was long deceased, but I think he really wanted to see the economics department change.
Part of the mandate I got, get rid of everyone except
a couple, namely Al Chalker of Langham, and basically I'll back you."
And he said, what would you need?
I'll go into this and maybe I'll be answering you.
I told him one of the greatest shortcomings I've always had in my life, outside of the dissertation years, my wife did most of my typing.
I'm not a typist, I don't want to even look at a typewriter.
I write longhand and C-types and then I erase and so forth or eradicate, and that's the way I work, and I never had enough secretarial support.
I ended up with an unbelievable contract.
Ten secretaries for ten faculty, and I'm rolling over seven or eight of the faculty.
Within two years' time, they were all gone outside of Ervlinger, Al Chalk.
The fellow who was quite a good athlete.
Oh, you will remember him.
What is his name?
Oh, I'll think of it later, but Marie Chalk would remember.
He was quite a track star.
He loved sports.
Doesn't ring a bell.
Anyway, but there was one other fellow that I knew I wasn't supposed to necessarily do anything about, and I didn't like the idea of chopping heads except I knew the other fellows in economics, and they were not my type.
They weren't going to be publishing, and the name of the game was to publish or perish.
because Earl did want A&M to be as outstanding as possible, and I guess Larry Farr could convince him that, by gosh, maybe someone like me could do it, and Earl was determined he was going to do things there.
So I was told I could have ten secretaries, and I also mentioned to him, I want to fly first class.
I'm tired of going back and forth in tourist class.
Okay, you could fly first class.
What's my salary?
He fixed it frankly, and I'm mentioning it, at $25,000, which I thought was pretty good.
I forget what I was getting in Florida State at the time, something like $17,000, $18,000 or so, so it was a good boost.
And I thought, boy, now finally I'm getting out of those depression years.
And pretty happy at the thought.
Meanwhile, a baseball player, a great baseball player, Brooks Robinson, playing third base for the Baltimore Orioles, signed a contract at 50.
And I thought to myself, well, you know,
If he's getting twice as much as me, that's not too bad.
I'm being well paid because by gosh I've got a long future as a professor, and poor Brooks Robinson, my gosh, he's maybe got another three, four years and then he's got to find a new livelihood.
I don't mind his getting twice as much.
Put it more positively, get one half as much as he's getting.
I've got a pretty good job going there at A&M, plus fly first class.
Of course, a lot of challenge.
Get rid of a lot of guys and do it nicely.
I found the seven or eight fellas that I replaced, I found just about each one of them a job that suited them, that they wanted, that they took.
In other words, I found it part of my job.
to get rid of them in effect, but to get them good jobs.
So that when they left, they left amicably and in fact would say, gee whiz,
We've been treated well by A&M, and that was, in effect, the general parameters of the job.
In those important discussions and decisions, who was the vice president of academic affairs?
Was Wayne Hall still the vice president?
Wayne Hall, and he was excellent.
Describe any role he played in these discussions.
Well he gave me a lot of fill in and guaranteed me that I was going to get this sort of backing and that what they wanted in exchange was no embarrassment.
No profanity in classrooms and stuff that I completely subscribe to.
In fact at the hosting that the Department of Econ and others had for me about six, seven years ago, who was it?
John Allen, who I groomed in a sense to replace me because I didn't intend to hold on as department head for too many years, but I wanted to do what I told him I would do and build it.
And at this stage of the game, I did have good contacts in the profession.
Anyway, John Allen mentioned something I had long forgotten, that I told every faculty member that we hired in the years subsequent to my joining here that they'd have to wear coat and tie and no profanity allowed in any classroom.
And John said, that made me one of those Grecian type of messengers.
No one liked me because I was giving all the dirty news that Mel was telling me we had to enforce.
Was the doctoral program already available?
No.
We had a wonderful undergraduate teaching.
These fellows who we replaced apparently were really outstanding teachers.
and here too memory now has faded from my mind, one of the fellows years later who had studied under Al back in the days and loved Al so much, organized former classmates into putting up a fund for Al Chalk scholarships and so forth, and the teaching was really outstanding.
And the enrollment, and you probably recall, in economics among undergraduate majors was outstanding.
But we only had two fellas, as far as I recall, with PhDs in the department, Al Chalk and Herb Linger.
All the rest were massive.
No, Alan Pulsiver may have had a PhD.
I believe there were three of them.
He was a pretty good fellow, but maybe a little more liberal and desired and what have you.
And anyway, I'm sorry I may have lost your question.
The doctoral program.
Yeah.
Did anybody promise that it would come about?
Oh, that was part of the dealings, chiefly with Wayne Hall, I suspect.
I don't recall in detail.
But of course if I'm coming here to make a good department, not a good department, I wanted to be in a top department, sort of like Penn State, Michigan State.
Florida State was, gosh, we had prospects over one other thing that was going wrong with Florida State.
Two friends of mine, Jim Buchanan, who had already been at Florida State and had left, and not only Jim Buchanan, but Charles Ferguson, who I had known because I had written articles with his senior advisor when he was writing his dissertation.
Charlie Ferguson and Jim Buchanan wanted to go to Florida State, and our department head and dean at Florida State at the time thought it would be too difficult to work enough money for those two fellows to go to Florida State.
And they would have added to our department at Florida State the necessary extras that would have made Florida State's Econ Department top quality.
So among other things, I've always wanted to be with the top quality department, but for reasons.
of constraint in universities in the South that weren't creating great departments.
So part of my ambition was to be associated with top-quality economists, and part of the arrangement with Wayne Hall and, in effect, basically Earl, was to not only change the department upside down by getting rid of, in effect, the fellows who did not have doctorates,
and did not have academic success in the Harvard-Yale sense of the term, ability, and to replace them.
But to replace them, you'd have to have a PhD program going.
Because any time you're going out for Charlie Ferguson, who we did get, Jim Buchanan, who still didn't come, he went out to UCLA at that point, Tom Saving, others of that kind, Bob Baseman, to get men of that caliber down here at A&M, we had to have a doctoral program because they wanted to deal chiefly with grad students.
And that was, as you know, the name of the game.
You publish back then especially, or you perish.
You want good money, you publish.
You publish, you want grad students.
You want grad students, you want great grad students.
It's all tied up, and this is, of course, Wayne Hall knew it well.
Earl Rudder I don't think knew it, but Earl Rudder knew Larry Faureka, and some people were advising him, and he also had an instinct, I'm sure he had to, to have a Wayne Hall and subsequently a Mac Prescott.
Well, I think Mac was probably after Earl had died.
But in any event, every decision I ever saw coming out of Earl Rudder was the right one from my standpoint.
If anything, if he did anything that was not wonderful, it was that he micromanaged too much.
But when he had trust in someone, from what I could tell, boy, he gave them a car planche and he gave me a car planche.
We had parties in our house where Earl literally helped me bartend.
And one of the fellows who we brought in here, who was it?
I think Chuck Maurice mentioned he, oh no, it was John Atwood.
Well, they're at each of them.
They have all the same type of stories.
They were flawed by the fact when they came to my house, I typically, especially if I had enough that I was recruiting at the time, we'd have a party and we'd have a member of the Board of Regents, maybe a John Lindsay was here with Earl Rutter and others.
And John Allen, I believe, was the one who mentioned that he was so flabbergasted by the people that were at the house there, interested in whether he was moving to A&M that he thought, my gosh, and he was en route to California for another interview.
He canceled and decided he's going to A&M.
Earl Leather was dedicated to
building as great a university as he could and as fast as he could.
I think part of the push behind him was his own natural push, his love for A&M.
I also imagine, and I did write this in that autobiography that became a biography recently, in some respects
I think what happened with Earl, he loved A&M when he was a youngster here.
He believed in it just like you and I have.
The students are unique at A&M.
I think one of the greatest advantages we have now are our students, more so than our faculty, not that our faculty isn't top quality, but our faculty in many ways is getting too PC?
May I say it?
They're not as willing as maybe they used to be to be unique and incorrect from the standpoint of academia.
But Earl, I imagine, found that even though the students were great, the reputation of A&M was not at the same level that he had imagined it might be because we were not a published parish university as such.
We're a university with wonderful people.
Not that you can't have wonderful published people also, I like to believe I am, but in any way, somehow, Earl would have bought the idea that economics was an area that he could build upon and move as fast as possible, and obviously, Larry Faurek led him to believe that I might be the type who would do it, and he sure gave me all the backing.
If I didn't have that backing, nothing could have happened, and I had a hundred percent backing.
Was there any request or proposal that you made as a part of your move over here that... Ten secretaries, first class... No, no, was there anything that wasn't accepted?
Not that I can recall.
Okay.
No, he... I got along with Irv Wattersoe naturally, and then after I convinced my wife that she was being honored, I sort of think she thought, well, boy, maybe this is... Oh, and I had to promise my wife...
something that I had refused ever to do, and that is go on a retirement program to be paid for by the state.
I like the old LORP, where I could pack up in two days' time and go to that other place, that other job, and not worry about the fact that my pension was not vested in the state.
Well, I agreed with Maui.
I said, honey, if we move here to A&M,
I'll go on TRS, which means sweetheart.
I'm now getting up in age.
I was in my early forties at the time, and you're almost in your forties, honey.
I'm not going to forget that someday we're going to have to retire, and if I go to A&M and pull my normal trick and three or four years from now we're off elsewhere and then maybe we even go back, I've got to put in ten years at A&M, otherwise all of a sudden we're not going to have any retirement to look into.
So I promised her I would not go ORP, I would go TRS, and that means I'm literally guaranteeing you ten years before I consider leaving.
Oddly enough, in three years, we had succeeded so much in building the department
I've been contacted by Auburn to see if I was interested in being president there, and I immediately said no.
Meanwhile, guess what?
Bill Ross at LSU says, we've got a bell chair for you.
It's wonderful.
Apparently, the chancellor of Louisiana State was a friend of Earl Ruddard's, and he
had heard of the building in economics at A&M, and Earl Wetter called me to his office.
This is a few years later, I'm taking you off of the earlier day.
And Earl had me in his office, and he said, I understand you're negotiating with Louisiana State.
I said, well I don't know, how did you hear that?
I don't know if I'm negotiating, I did negotiate years ago and turned it down, and I do know that
I've been contacted, would I be interested in a bell chair?"
But how did you know that, Mr. Rudder?
Well, so-and-so was a dear friend of mine and he called me and asked me if I would mind greatly if they gave you the offer that he's been asked to give me, to give you, you know, you, Mel.
And I said, well, if
You want to, go ahead and give them the offer, but I'm going to try to stop them."
And at which point, this is in 1969, I'd been department head for three years.
One of the first things we did when I came here was to set up the PhD program.
I think that went through Jack Williams.
group in Austin at the time.
It went fast.
I also began a negotiation with the National Science Foundation.
The guy I wanted to replace me was then the head of the econ section at NSF and an old-time friend of mine from North Carolina.
We picked up, we knew we were going to get a big grant, which we did, about a million dollars.
Around 1950, I think, we got the money.
So, backtrack to LSU, Earl Rudder said, I hope you're not going to leave.
Don't you like it here?
I said, Mr. Rudder, you've been fantastic.
Everyone has been fantastic.
Off the record, even Andy Suttle, fantastic.
But I must admit, I'm doing this administrative work only because I wanted to be in a top flight department, and we've got a top flight department now, but now I want to go back and try to do more writing.
I've got an outside dream that I might someday get a Nobel.
or whatever, and my ambition is really to be a great economist.
I've had fun.
We've done, obviously, more than you expected and even more than I expected.
And if LSU does offer me what they're going to offer me, that I've got an idea, I suspect I might take it, but then I have to argue with my wife and admit that we've lost another retirement because I'm stuck with the state of Texas.
And if I move in three, four years, and this was the end of the third year that this is going on, I've thrown down three more years of my life, but gee whiz, I might.
Though I don't want to leave, frankly.
Well, what do you want?
I told them.
He gave me everything I wanted as a professor, and all of those alumni professorships have fallen, and money, and deal.
So I turned the job over.
But now I've taken you out of the context you had me going in on the negotiation with Earl.
All right, you mentioned Suttle.
Was Andy Suttle here when you got here?
What role did he play in the recruitment, if any?
I think Andy was tied up with the Welsh Foundation.
And I believe President Rudder thought that Andy was a catalyst for a lot of future money for A&M.
And at this stage of the game I think President Rudder knew that money was a big factor, or it was the factor, if he's going to convert A&M into
Unfortunately, very academically respectable, and at times when I look at some of these other places like Harvard and what have you, I don't know if I wanted us to be that academically acceptable.
Now, but was Suttle already here when... Suttle was here.
Was he one of the people that met with you to perhaps... No.
No, I didn't meet him until after I was here.
Okay.
What was his role after you got here in helping the department?
I think he knew that the President would have wanted to back this department.
I don't think Andy liked me too much and I didn't like him too much.
Did he get in the way of anything?
No.
He never got in the way.
Frank Hubert got in the way once.
Can you share how?
Frank, yes.
I'm wheeling and dealing with fellas I knew.
Jim Blackman, who got an O'Dell subsequently but did not go to A&M.
Charles Ferguson, who we got, Tom Saving, who we got, Bob Baseman, who we got.
Anyway, another fellow who was a Texan, and I was picking on fellows who I knew would not be biased against an all men's university, which was now becoming coeducational, but still not that, and Traut was frankly at my university, Washington University,
And I'm chatting with Trout, and he said, well, I've heard that what you say you've produced, and if you could produce what you and I are talking about, I'll join you.
I said, well, tell me exactly what you would demand of us, and I'll let you know exactly if I can do it.
And if I cannot do it, you don't come.
If I do it, you come.
We laid it out cold.
And that's the way I dealt with Bob Baseman, with Tom Saving, with everyone, because I figured that regardless of subtle, who from time to time would chop pay increases or have some impact that way, on those who I'm recruiting, I never had anything that didn't come out exactly the way I told Fergie or Tom Saving, what have you.
Anyway, guess of all times, I guess Frank Hubit got a little tired of it, and he refused to back the offer that I had told Trout Raider he could expect.
So I told Frank, I said, this man's going to turn me down.
He's going to turn us down.
We need him.
His field of expertise in economics was one area that we were still weak at.
And by the way, within three years' time, we were rated in the
The American Economic Review is about the 19th best department of economics in the country.
That's like starting football one year and two years later you're playing against Notre Dame and beating them.
Anyway, I said, I'm going to lose this man.
He said, no you won't.
Sure enough, I sent the offer.
Sure enough, the word came back, Mel, I told you what I wanted.
You said I would get it.
Now you tell me I can't have it.
The answer is I'm not coming.
I showed a letter to Frank Hubert.
Frank said, oh, I'd offer him summer income.
I offered him much more money, in effect, than the basic offer was to me.
He turned it down.
That was the only time I had trouble with Frank Hubert.
And maybe the only logic of that story is if you know your profession, and you know this better than I do, Haskell, from your experience as a president of your university, if people have faith and trust in you, they're going to want to join you.
But if they think that, oh, he says one thing, but he's not going to produce many of these things, you've got a tough job on your hands.
You're not going to succeed too well.
And at that point,
We had succeeded so beautifully, the world and the country got upside down.
They had Charlie Ferguson drawing more money than baseball players were back then, and Charlie just got what he deserved, frankly, and he was a wonderful asset to all.
Now, when you got here, did you have some other economics program, some other institution that was your model you were hoping to do what
No, you know, a lot of people would say we were probably emulating the U of Chicago.
Quite the opposite.
Most of my publications were coming out of the opposite camp, the Harvard School.
Harvard was a liberal group, and I wasn't a liberal economist, but my economics was always maverick vis-à-vis Chicago.
Chicago economics was always monetary theory and stuff like that.
And I was going on my own tangent based on a dissertation that gave me the idea of economic space.
So I was sort of a maverick in that respect.
And I had, even though most of the men that I hired were conservatives politically, I deliberately went out of my way to get non-conservatives.
I hired a couple of fellows, I don't know if I should mention them, Bert Bowden, and, gee, another fellow's name is escaping me, but I deliberately hired some fellows who would be regarded as rather liberal.
Now your first, who was your first big hire?
First big hire.
What was that?
They came and clustered.
Who was that?
I would say Charlie Ferguson and Tom Saving were the biggest names.
Eric Fuhrer-Botten, a real big name, and subsequently Bob Baseman, who in his field of econometrics was at that stage of the game